Disorder information from conductance: a quantum inverse problem
(Supplemental Material)
S. Mukim, F. P. Amorim, A. R. Rocha, R. B. Muniz, C. Lewenkopf, and M. S. Ferreira
I. INVERSION PROCEDURE: TECHNICAL
ASPECTS
Here we provide details of the inversion procedure im-
plementation and an analysis of its accuracy. For that
purpose we use the model system introduced in the main
text as an illustrative example. Our strategy relies on
calculating the conductance spectra that is used as in-
put functions of the inversion method simply because
we can refer back to the Hamiltonian that generated
them in the ﬁrst place, allowing us to establish whether
or not the inversion was successful.
A simple test is
to start from the Hamiltonian of an arbitrary speciﬁc
conﬁguration of N impurities randomly located and cal-
culate the corresponding conductance spectrum.
This
translates into an impurity concentration n (see main
manuscript). The inversion works by ﬁnding the concen-
tration that minimizes the misﬁt function, which we call
nmin. We then deﬁne the inversion procedure accuracy
as α = |n −nmin|/n. In what follows we analyse how α
depends on a few essential parameters and show that a
careful tuning of such parameters may improve the suc-
cess rate of the inversion methodology.
1. Accuracy of the inversion procedure
Figure 1 shows the inversion accuracy α for graphene
nanoribbons (GNR) with W = 3a and L = 100 unit
cells as a function of impurity concentration. One can
see that α is very small for all concentrations below 8%,
clearly indicating that our inversion tool is very reliable
for dilute impurity concentrations.
It is worth recalling that we can not only conﬁrm
what the real impurity concentration that generated the
Hamiltonian is but also the exact locations of the ran-
domly placed impurities.
Interestingly, as the concen-
tration increases we ﬁnd a growing number of impurities
that are adjacent to one another forming pairs that may
act as if they were isolated scatterers. For example, a ran-
domly selected conﬁguration of 15 impurities may have
13 of them well isolated whereas the remainder are clus-
tered into a pair. In cases like that the inversion ﬁnds a
concentration that would correspond to 14 impurities for
the simple fact that the cluster may actually behave as
a single scatterer. This explains why the inversion error
also increases with the concentration. It is possible to
reduce the error further by accounting for the probabil-
ity of forming such pairs. By relaxing the assumption
2
4
6
8
10
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
n (%)
α
FIG. 1.
Inversion accuracy α plotted as a function of the
impurity concentration n for a GNR with W = 3a and L =
100 unit cells. The impurity on-site potential was arbitrarily
chosen as ϵ = 0.5t.
of short-range uncorrelated disorder originally made, we
may adopt a similar strategy to the one used to produce
Figure 3(b) of the main text, i.e., where we treat im-
purity pairs as if they corresponded to a diﬀerent class
of impurities. In this way it is straightforward to dis-
cern between isolated and paired impurities, leading to
an improved accuracy that can be sustained up to higher
concentrations.
2. Averaging energy window
The misﬁt function χ depends on the integration limits
E+ and E−, that is, the averaging energy window.
Figure 2 plots the inversion error α as a function of
(E+ −E−)/Z, where Z is the bandwidth.
Note that
α is large for very narrow energy windows, in perfect
agreement with the single-energy featureless results of
Fig. 2(a) presented in the main manuscript. Note that
any window at least 20% of the bandwidth generates ex-
cellent results.
In practical situations, it can be a diﬃcult task to ob-
tain the conductance spectrum over a signiﬁcant portion
of the bandwidth.
We argue that good accuracy, i.e.,
small values of α, can be obtained with fairly small av-
eraging windows. The idea of averaging is to eliminate
the universal conductance ﬂuctuations from the misﬁt
function χ. Hence, the averaging window has to be suf-
ﬁciently broad to contain a large number of oscillations
of Γ(E). More precisely, ∆E/δEcor ≫1, where δEcor
arXiv:2007.12504v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  24 Jul 2020
