2
L
W
(a)
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
Γ
Ε/t
(b)
FIG. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of the system under consid-
eration. Two semi-inﬁnite leads of width W are separated by
a region of length L containing a concentration n of impuri-
ties represented by red dots. (b) Calculated conductance for
a system made of a graphene nanoribbon of length L = 100
unit cells as a function of the chemical potential (in units
of t).
The dashed line corresponds to the conductance of
the pristine system, i.e., in the absence of impurities. The
solid line shows the conductance for a disordered conﬁgura-
tion containing N = 42 substitutional impurities (ϵ = 0.5t),
which accounts for a concentration of n = 3%.
and the on-site energies fully deﬁne the electronic struc-
ture of the nanoribbon.
Fig. 1(b) shows the energy-
dependent conductance for an armchair-edged GNR of
width W = 3a, a = 2.7Å being the graphene lattice pa-
rameter. The dashed line is the conductance spectrum
Γ0 for the pristine GNR. Results are shown for positive
energies knowing that Γ0(E) = Γ0(−E).
We now introduce N substitutional impurities.
It
is convenient to express the impurity number also as
the percentage concentration n deﬁned as n = 100 ×
(N/Ntot), where Ntot is the total number of sites in the
central region. Both N and n will be used interchange-
ably. The scattering strength of the impurities is char-
acterized by the contrast between their on-site potential
ϵ relative to that of the host, chosen to be zero.
The
solid line of Fig. 1(b) shows the conductance for the GNR
with N = 42 impurities, ϵ = 0.5 t and L = 100 unit cells
(n = 3%). Impurity locations were randomly selected but
kept ﬁxed in the underlying Hamiltonian that generated
the conductance Γ(E) of Fig. 1(b).
Being the conductance sensitive to the locations of
scattering centres, it is diﬃcult to devise an inversion tool
capable of spatially mapping all impurities from the con-
ductance spectrum information alone. The brute-force
method of comparing the input conductance Γ(E) with
those of every possible disorder conﬁguration is not viable
because the number of combinations is too large for any
practical situation. Machine-learning strategies are cur-
rently being attempted to overcome this combinatorial
hurdle [13–20] but spatial mapping of quantum devices
through inversion remains challenging.
Nevertheless, given the conductance spectrum Γ(E) of
a device, one might ask whether it is possible to ﬁnd the
exact number of scattering centres in it. This may not
reveal the position of every impurity but it is a valuable
piece of information and a lot more feasible to obtain.
While the brute-force approach remains impractical, we
must account for as many disorder realizations as possi-
ble. We deﬁne the conﬁgurationally averaged (CA) con-
ductance ⟨Γ⟩by summing over M realizations with the
same number N of impurities (or concentration n), i.e.,
⟨Γ(E, n)⟩= 1
M
M
X
j=1
Γj(E) ,
(2)
where j labels the diﬀerent conﬁgurations. See SM [21]
for a discussion on the suitable choices for M.
The deviation between an arbitrary conductance result
and its CA counterpart is given by
∆Γ(E, n) = Γ(E) −⟨Γ(E, n)⟩
(3)
We reiterate that Γ(E) acts as the input conductance
spectrum of a single realization and represents the im-
mutable conductance of the device under investigation.
The CA conductance spectrum, on the other hand, re-
ﬂects the contribution of very many conﬁgurations and
depends, in addition, on the impurity concentration. By
treating n as a variable parameter, we can look for mini-
mization trends in ∆Γ(E, n) that might indicate the real
concentration in the device. Unfortunately, when plot-
ted as a function of n in Fig. 2(a), the deviation ∆Γ for
a ﬁxed energy E is featureless with wide error bars that
result from repeating the calculation 1000 times.
However, much cleaner trends are seen when ∆Γ is
used in the form of a functional that measures how good
a match Γ(E) and ⟨Γ(E, n)⟩are. This quantity is the
misﬁt function χ(n) deﬁned as
χ(n) =
Z E+
E−
dE [ Γ(E) −⟨Γ(E, n)⟩]2 ,
(4)
where E−and E+ establish the energy window over which
the integration takes place. Fig. 2(b) shows χ as a func-
tion of n and displays a more distinctive trend with
smaller error bars.
The plot indicates that there is a
sweet spot in impurity concentration for which the in-
tegrated deviation is minimal. Remarkably, this agrees
with the actual number of impurities used in the calcu-
lation of Γ(E), shown as a vertical (red) dashed line in
the lower part of Fig. 2(b). Such a coincidence suggests
that it might be possible to use χ(n) as an inversion tool
to ﬁnd the number of impurities in a quantum device
