Disorder information from conductance: a quantum inverse problem
S. Mukim1, F. P. Amorim3, A. R. Rocha3, R. B. Muniz4, C. Lewenkopf4 and M. S. Ferreira1,2
1School of Physics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland
2Centre for Research on Adaptive Nanostructures and Nanodevices (CRANN) & Advanced Materials
and Bioengineering Research (AMBER) Centre, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland
3 Instituto de Física Teórica, São Paulo State University, 01140-070, São Paulo, Brazil and
4 Instituto de Física, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Brazil
(Dated: July 27, 2020)
It is straightforward to calculate the conductance of a quantum device once all its scattering cen-
ters are fully speciﬁed. However, to do this in reverse, i.e., to ﬁnd information about the composition
of scatterers in a device from its conductance, is an elusive task. This is particularly more chal-
lenging in the presence of disorder. Here we propose a procedure in which valuable compositional
information can be extracted from the seemingly noisy spectral conductance of a two-terminal dis-
ordered quantum device. In particular, we put forward an inversion methodology that can identify
the nature and respective concentration of randomly-distributed impurities by analyzing energy-
dependent conductance ﬁngerprints. Results are shown for graphene nanoribbons as a case in point
using both tight-binding and density functional theory simulations, indicating that this inversion
technique is general, robust and can be employed to extract structural and compositional informa-
tion of disordered mesoscopic devices from standard conductance measurements.
Structures whose dimensions are comparable to or
smaller than the electronic mean free path display trans-
port features not associated with the classical ohmic be-
haviour [1]. These are quantum features found by solving
the Schrödinger equation once the system Hamiltonian
is known. Indeed, it is straightforward to describe how
current ﬂows in a quantum device by calculating its con-
ductance once all scattering centres are speciﬁed. How-
ever, to do this in reverse, i.e., to ﬁnd information about
scatterers in a quantum device by simply looking at its
conductance is rather challenging. This is a kind of In-
verse Problem (IP) which consists of obtaining from a set
of observations the causal factors that generated them in
the ﬁrst place. IP are intrinsic parts of numerous visual-
ization tools [2–5] but are not as common in the quantum
realm, and even less so in the presence of disorder.
Disorder makes the description of the impurity po-
tential by inverse scattering methods quite a daunting
task. Multiple scattering depends on the scatterers’ loca-
tions and therefore likely to aﬀect the electronic dynam-
ics in seemingly unpredictable ways. To make matters
worse theory shows that quantum interference in chaotic
[6] and/or diﬀusive systems [7] gives rise to ﬂuctuations
whose statistical properties are universal, i.e. system in-
dependent, indicating that standard IP methods are nei-
ther practical nor useful in such situations.
Here we give a diﬀerent twist to quantum IP ap-
proaches and demonstrate that, instead of detrimental,
disorder may be actually beneﬁcial to extracting infor-
mation about scattering centres in a quantum device.
In particular, we focus on the energy-dependent conduc-
tance of a quantum system, hereafter referred to as the
conductance spectrum, which will serve as the only in-
put of the inversion procedure described here. This is
a quantity normally obtained by standard experimental
setups of a gated two-terminal device but may also be
found by calculation once the underlying Hamiltonian is
fully speciﬁed. Here we introduce our inversion method-
ology by using the latter as a proxy for the former, i.e,
calculated conductance spectra representing their exper-
imental equivalent.
The advantage of using calculated
input functions is that we can refer back to the Hamil-
tonian that generated them in the ﬁrst place, making it
possible to assess the success of the inversion procedure.
Let us start by deﬁning the system to be used through-
out the manuscript.
It consists of two electrodes sep-
arated by a scattering region of length L and width
W, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), a rather typical setup
of electronic transport.
The distinction between the
leads and the central region is that the latter contains
impurities as scattering centres [8].
In the linear re-
sponse regime, the Landauer conductance reads G =
2e2/h
R
dE(−∂f/∂E)Γ(E), where f(E) is the Fermi dis-
tribution and Γ(E) is the dimensionless conductance (or
transmission) given by [9, 10]
Γ(E) = tr

Gr(E)ΓR(E)Ga(E)ΓL(E)

(1)
Here Gr (Ga = [Gr]†) is the full retarded (advanced)
Green function and ΓL (ΓR) is the line width function
accounting for the injection and lifetime of states in the
left (right) contact. For simplicity, we consider the zero-
temperature limit G = 2e2/h Γ(E). Thermal corrections
will be shown to have little eﬀect on our procedure.
The expression for Γ in Eq. (1) is model-independent,
i.e., once the Hamiltonian is known one can ﬁnd the cor-
responding Green function and obtain the energy depen-
dent conductance of the system [9].
We focus on sys-
tems with relatively simple electronic structures, namely
graphene nanoribbons (GNR). Although not an essen-
tial requirement, it helps to illustrate the methodology
since GNR are well described by the tight-binding model
[11, 12].
In this case the nearest-neighbour hopping t
arXiv:2007.12504v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  24 Jul 2020
