4
n (%)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.26
0.28
0.30
0.32
0.34
χ
- 8
- 6
- 4
- 2
0
2
0
1
2
3
Ε
Γ
(b)
(a)
(eV)
FIG. 4. (a) The (red) solid line is the conductance spectrum
Γ(E) obtained from a speciﬁc disorder realization of N = 10
nitrogen impurities, i.e., n = 0.7%. The (blue) dashed line
represents the CA conductance (M = 2000) calculated for the
concentration that minimizes the misﬁt function χ, shown in
(b) as a function of n. The misﬁt function was generated with
an energy window deﬁned by E−= 0 and E+ = 2 eV. Dashed
line indicates the exact concentration used to generate the
input conductance.
system. While such an increase may lead to the appear-
ance of more minima in the misﬁt function, it remains a
straightforward numerical task to identify them all.
To show that this method is indeed model-independent
we have also tested it in the case of a system fully de-
scribed by Density Functional Theory (DFT). In particu-
lar, DFT-based conductance calculations were performed
for armchair GNR of sizes L = 100 unit cells and W = 3a
containing a speciﬁc spatial distribution of N = 10 ni-
trogen atoms as substitutional impurities, which corre-
sponds to n = 0.7%. See SM [21] for details of the DFT
calculations. The solid line in Fig. 4(a) shows the con-
ductance spectrum Γ(E) of the system obtained within
DFT, which will now serve as the input conductance for
the inversion procedure. Regarding the CA conductance,
there are two options on how ⟨Γ(E, n)⟩can be obtained.
First option is to repeat the steps taken to generate Γ(E)
of Fig. 4(a) over several diﬀerent disorder conﬁgurations.
Bearing in mind that the impurity concentration n must
be kept as a variable parameter, the averaging procedure
deﬁned in Eq. (2) requires M diﬀerent conﬁgurations for
every single value of n, which indicates how computa-
tionally demanding this task might become if carried out
entirely within DFT. The alternative option is to use the
tight-binding (TB) model to carry out the CA calcula-
tion. In this case the TB model provides a fast averaging
strategy without necessarily compromising in accuracy.
Here, we have selected the latter option and made
use of DFT conductance spectra to identify suitable TB
parameters that describe the nitrogen impurities in the
GNR. See SM [21] for details, including a brief discus-
sion on the choices available to extract TB parameters
from DFT calculations [23–26] and their implementation
in large scale transport calculations [27–29].
The CA
conductance ⟨Γ(E, n)⟩is then generated within the TB
model employing M = 2000 realizations, leading subse-
quently to the misﬁt function χ(n) of Fig. 4(b). Once
again, χ(n) displays a minimum at exactly the same ni-
trogen concentration used to generated the input conduc-
tance Γ(E). Another indication of success can be seen by
plotting the CA conductance evaluated at the minimiz-
ing concentration of χ(n).
Shown as a dashed line in
Fig. 4(a), it has all the key features of Γ(E) even though
both curves were calculated independently. Despite the
computational complexity of obtaining the misﬁt func-
tion entirely within DFT, this has also been tested and,
reassuringly, we ﬁnd exactly the same answer (see SM
[21] for details).
All input spectra in this manuscript were calculated
from known Hamiltonians because it is then straightfor-
ward to test the success of the inversion method. Ulti-
mately, inversions must be performed based on experi-
mental conductance data of systems for which we do not
have the full Hamiltonian.
This calls for an inversion
tool that is reliable, general and robust. The fact that
our inversion strategy works for systems whose electronic
structures are described by a simple TB model as well as
by DFT calculations is indicative of the generality and
robustness of this approach.
That disorder is beneﬁcial to this inversion procedure
is made evident by the distinction between the two pan-
els of Fig. 2.
Viewed at a ﬁxed energy, the deviation
between the input and the CA conductance spectra re-
veals very little about the system. In contrast, the misﬁt
function entails a lot of information. The eﬃciency of the
procedure relies on an ergodic hypothesis: conductance
ﬂuctuations of a single sample versus energy are related
to sample to sample ﬂuctuations at a ﬁxed energy. More
precisely, the ergodic hypothesis assumes that a running
average over a continuous parameter upon which the con-
ductance depends is equivalent to sampling diﬀerent im-
purity conﬁgurations. Here the continuous parameter is
the energy, but the concept can be extended to a range of
other quantities, e.g., magnetic ﬁeld, gate voltage, etc. A
thorough mathematical discussion of this issue is beyond
the scope of this manuscript, but it is worth mentioning
that the ergodic hypothesis can be proven exactly for cer-
tain models of disordered systems[30–32]. That explains
why the energy integration induces a distinctive mini-
mum in χ(n) since it is analogous to considering a wider
