3
10
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
M
α
FIG. 4. Inversion accuracy α as a function of M. Calculations
are for a GNR of L = 100 unit cells, all of which containing
3% of impurities.
mean dimensionless conductance, require higher values
of M to achieve statistical signiﬁcance. Likewise, larger
2D systems and 3D ones, with larger mean transmission
coeﬃcients than those considered in this study, may re-
quire fewer conﬁgurations.
Figure 4 conﬁrms the earlier statement that M = 103
is suﬃcient to achieve statistical signiﬁcance and reduce
ﬂuctuations to acceptable levels. In fact, the inversion
error practically vanishes once M is of that order of mag-
nitude.
5. Recursive Method
As shown in the main manuscript, the ﬁrst order ap-
proximation of CA conductance induces a minimum in
the misﬁt function located at n∗= −B/A. Both A and
B result from integrations whose integrands involve the
function β(E) deﬁned in the main text as the n-derivative
of the CA conductance evaluated at n = 0. While this
is an excellent approximation for n ≤3%, it can be ex-
tended to higher concentrations (up to 7%) if we adopt
the following recursive procedure. We must redeﬁne β(E)
as the n-derivative of the CA conductance evaluated at
an arbitrary concentration n and follow the steps below:
1. Evaluate average β(E) between n = 0 and an initial
choice of n.
2. Calculate n∗using the expression given in the main
manuscript with the average β(E) function evalu-
ated in step 1.
3. Make n = n∗and return to step 1 until n∗con-
verges.
II. DFT CALCULATIONS
The DFT calculation was performed using a localized
atomic orbital basis set (LCAO), implemented in the
SIESTA package [9]. All calculations were carried out
using a double-ζ basis with polarization orbitals within
the generalized gradient approximation (GGA-PBE) [10]
for the exchange and correlation potential. A real space
mesh cut-oﬀof 300Ry, and a Monkhorst-Pack k-grid 80
points along the ribbon direction were chosen. The struc-
tures were fully relaxed down to a threshold force criteria
of 0.01eV/Å.
Calculations for the disordered system were imple-
mented in the following way: two initial DFT calculations
were done, namely for a pristine GNR, and for a nanorib-
bon of length L = 7 unit cells containing only a single
nitrogen substitutional impurity. From the Hamiltonians
of the pristine ribbon and the one containing a single ni-
trogen, we assemble the N-impurity device by randomly
distributing these building blocks over a ﬁxed length and
defect concentration. This is illustrated in Fig. 5 show-
ing how the building blocks are patched together to form
the device containing a ﬁnite concentration of impurities.
Given the localized nature of the basis orbitals, the full
Hamiltonian for the disordered problem is block tridiag-
onal. We can thus use a recursive method [11–14] to ﬁnd
the Green function matrix elements required to compute
the Landauer conductance. These were the steps followed
to obtain the conductance spectra Γ(E) of all DFT-based
calculations.
1. DFT-based tight-binding Hamiltonian
There are numerous ways of extracting eﬀective tight-
binding (TB) Hamiltonians from DFT calculations, all of
which reproduce the corresponding band structures very
accurately [15–17]. Combined with the help of quantum
transport scripts [18], the TB parameters can be exported
to highly eﬃcient codes [19–21] that can handle quantum
transport calculations of very large systems. Despite the
wide availability of such DFT-based TB Hamiltonians,
for simplicity, the illustrative examples in the manuscript
focus on single-band TB models. We stress, however, the
following description is applicable to whichever TB-based
model one chooses to adopt.
Instead of the usual band-structure ﬁtting [22, 23], our
adopted procedure consisted of comparing the conduc-
tance spectra calculated within DFT and tight-binding.
For the sake of diﬀerentiation we refer to them as ΓDFT
N
and ΓTB
N , where the subscript simply indicates the num-
ber of impurities contained in the device.
From the
impurity-free results, i.e. ΓDFT
0
and ΓTB
0 , it is straight-
forward to extract the hopping parameter t that best
captures the electronic structure of the pristine ribbon
in question.
The impurity on-site parameter ϵ is eas-
